+++
title = "The Way Forward"
date = 2018-11-29T12:13:12-08:00
weight = 45
+++

We can pull all of this together with set of of sustainable open source
community principles - these are the guidelines we should follow if we want to
create a sustainable open source community. Then we can create specific
implementations of these principles for our communities - social contracts that
spell out the communities' intentions, their relationship to monetization, and
the principles upon which they will thrive: their community social contract.

I don't pretend to know or have seen all the possible models, or have a perfect
understanding of what happens when we build intentionally sustainable open
source communities. My hope is that we can help each other, and the industry at
large, understand that communities are about people coming together with common
cause, and helping each other day by day. That the value of development in the
commons isn't just a technically superior model: it's also the right social and
ethical model.

I believe that if we do that, we will start to see a reverse of the trend where
the most closed companies have the best outcomes. Instead, we will see that the
companies who are the best participants in the community, who build the best,
most sustainable model of helping their users and customers solve their
problems, will be the winners. There is no comparison to the impact we have on
each other when we form supportive, inclusive, meaningful communities. I hope
you'll join me.

For next steps: explore the [principles]({{% ref "principles" %}}), [business
models]({{% ref "business-models" %}})
